Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about the global housing crisis.
All over the world, with very few
exceptions, house prices have been
rising, outstripping incomes, and making
home ownership harder than ever before.
So in this episode, we’ll be looking at
what’s actually happening, what are some
of the causes and effects of this, and
what–if anything–can be done about it.
I will warn you, this is quite a
long episode, but it’s an important
and complicated topic, and so I
hope you will excuse this being
somewhat longer than usual ones.
But before we get right into this episode,
let me briefly remind you that you can
become a member of Leonardo English
and follow along with the interactive
transcript and subtitles over on the
website, which is leonardoenglish.com.
Membership of Leonardo English gives
you access to more than double the
number of episodes, plus all of
our learning materials, including
instant translations in 12 languages,
study packs, and much, much more.
So, if you are ready to take the next
step on your English learning journey,
the place to go is leonardoenglish.com.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
In British English, we have an
expression you might not have come
across before: “safe as houses”.
Something is “safe as houses”,
or “as safe as houses”.
It’s an unusual expression,
on the one hand.
Grammatically it's odd.
It's 'safe as houses' [plural] even though
you're describing something singular.
You say 'something is as safe as
houses,' not 'as safe as a house.'
If you had to guess what it meant,
I imagine you might think “very
safe”, because a house is safe,
with a door and a lock, and so on.
That would be a perfectly reasonable
guess, and it’s partially right.
Safe as houses doesn’t just mean safe
in a general sense, it typically means
something is a safe and good investment.
After all, you can see a house.
Nobody can steal your
house or take it from you.
You can also live in it,
which is something you can’t
do with most investments.
And if you are lucky enough to have
some extra cash and are looking for
a sensible investment opportunity,
historically buying property and renting
it out has been considered a good option.
Of course this isn’t a
uniquely British phenomenon.
Investing in property is popular all
over the world for similar reasons,
with people in some countries
tending to do it more so than others.
And as you may know, in the UK house
prices have continued to rise almost every
year, for the best part of a century.
Slowly but surely, up and up they went.
In 1952, the average price of a house
in the UK was £1,891, which is the
equivalent of around £48,000 today.
Last year, in 2025, the average
house price was £271,188.
And even in inflation-adjusted
terms, house prices have increased
by more than five and a half times.
Now, the fact that the price has
increased so drastically isn’t
a terrible thing in itself.
In fact, for several decades, from
the 1950s to the mid-1990s, house
prices increased very gradually
every year, at the same rate,
more or less, as average incomes.
House prices went up, but so did
salaries, so it all evened out.
Being able to buy a home on one person’s
regular salary was perfectly possible.
But then, starting in the
late 1990s, something…changed.
Instead of going up slowly but
surely, property prices in the
UK started to increase steeply.
And importantly, they
started to significantly
outstrip the growth in wages.
In the 1950s, the average home cost
the equivalent of 4 years of wages.
In 2021, the average home in
London cost the equivalent
of almost 13 years of wages.
And rent has increased at a similar pace.
The average rent in the whole of
the UK is £1,400 a month, while
in London it’s a whopping £2,200.
Now, as I’m sure you know, this is far
from a uniquely British phenomenon, and
the UK is not even the worst in terms of
housing prices and housing affordability.
In fact, in many countries the
situation is even more extreme.
Cities like Sydney, Toronto, Vancouver,
Hong Kong, and even in parts of Europe
have all seen similar — and in some cases
even sharper — rises in house prices
over roughly the same period of time.
So, what’s going on?
Why, almost the world over, has there
been such a surge in property prices,
where a roof over your head has gone
from something most people could
reasonably expect to afford to something
that increasingly feels out of reach?
Well, there are some unique factors
that apply to specific areas, which
we will go into later in the episode.
But there are also some global
forces, factors that affect
the global property market.
The first and most important shift
was that buying a home gradually
became less about income, and
more about access to credit.
For much of the twentieth century, if
you wanted to buy a house, how much
you earned placed a fairly strict
limit on what you could afford.
Mortgages were relatively conservative,
deposits were large, interest rates were
often in the double digits, and banks were
cautious about how much they would lend.
In other words, you couldn’t
borrow very much money, and
borrowing money was very expensive.
But from the late 1990s onwards,
borrowing became easier and cheaper.
Interest rates fell, not just in the UK,
but across much of the developed world.
Monthly mortgage payments
became more affordable.
And banks became increasingly willing to
lend larger multiples of people’s incomes.
This had a powerful effect on prices.
It pushed them up dramatically.
Estate agents increasingly encouraged
prospective buyers to think not
about the sale price, but rather
the monthly mortgage payments.
After all, if your monthly payments are
affordable, the price of your house is
just a number; it doesn’t really matter.
And anyway, it would
almost certainly go up.
They always did.
As long as interest rates
stayed low, house prices were
allowed to keep climbing.
And, like with anything, the more prices
rose, the more attractive property
became as an investment opportunity.
For many years, it was very
attractive, in the UK especially,
which had all sorts of incentives
encouraging people to become landlords.
After all, the bank would only
require a small deposit, a tenant’s
monthly rent would more than cover
the monthly mortgage costs, and
the price would continue to rise.
What this meant was that housing
increasingly stopped being treated
primarily as a place to live, and started
being treated as a financial asset.
Then, of course, came the
Great Financial Crisis of 2008.
This crisis, which began with risky
mortgages in the United States,
showed what could happen when
housing prices became completely
disconnected from economic fundamentals.
As you'll know, when the bubble
burst, millions of people lost their
homes, banks collapsed, and the
global economy went into freefall.
You might think this would
have taught everyone a lesson.
That it might have led to a
complete rethink of housing
as an investment vehicle.
But what actually happened was,
in many ways, the opposite.
Governments and central banks were
absolutely terrified of another collapse.
So instead of allowing prices to
fall to more affordable levels,
they did everything in their power
to support the market and prevent
prices from dropping too far.
They pumped lots of money into the
financial system, and kept interest rates
extremely low, for a very long time.
In some countries, rates stayed
close to zero for more than a decade.
The aim was to make borrowing
cheap, encourage spending,
and keep economies alive.
And in many ways, it worked.
The world bounced back.
But there was a side effect.
A huge inflow of capital into assets:
stocks, bonds, and crucially, property.
And this is where the idea of
housing as a global market starts
to make a little more sense.
In the past, the price of a home was
mostly determined by local factors:
local wages, local demand, local
supply, because the people buying
and living in them would be locals.
But increasingly, housing prices were
being influenced by global money.
Money looking for safety.
Money looking for returns.
And this money isn’t abstract.
It comes from pension funds, insurance
companies, investment firms, and wealthy
individuals, all looking for places
to park large sums of money in assets
that feel stable and predictable.
Compared to complex financial products,
housing looks reassuringly simple.
It exists physically.
It generates income through rent.
And governments have a strong incentive
to stop its value from collapsing.
And once housing becomes part of
that global flow of capital, it
stops behaving like an ordinary good.
At that point, it doesn’t really
matter whether a flat is in
London, Lisbon, or Toronto.
What matters is that it’s in
a country with a stable legal
system, strong property rights,
and a reputation for safety.
That’s why similar patterns started
to appear in very different places;
a fireman in Paris was now no longer
bidding for a property against the
local greengrocer, schoolteacher,
and wedding photographer, but against
sophisticated international investors.
So, demand for housing soon started to
significantly outstrip supply in most
major cities, further pushing up prices.
Now, the obvious question is,
“if demand is so high, why don't
we just build more houses?”
This is where we need to
talk about housing supply.
Because alongside all these
financial factors pushing up
prices, there's also been a chronic
failure to build enough housing
where people actually want to live.
In the UK, the planning system is
notoriously complex and restrictive.
Getting permission to build can
take years, and even when permission
is granted, local opposition often
delays or blocks development entirely.
There's actually an acronym for this:
NIMBY, which stands for "Not In My
Back Yard", and describes someone
who opposes new construction in
their area, worried it will change
the character of the neighbourhood
or reduce their own property values.
And then there are the
practical constraints.
You can't build more land in central
London, or San Francisco, or Hong Kong.
These cities are hemmed in by
geography, and the most desirable
areas are already built up.
Add to this rising construction costs,
labour shortages, and the fact that
developers sometimes hold onto land
rather than building on it—hoping
values will increase even further—and
you have a situation where supply
simply can't keep up with demand.
So even if the money side of things were
sorted out, we'd still have a fundamental
shortage of homes in the places
where people actually want  to live.
And demand keeps growing.
Not just from population growth,
but from changing demographics.
People are living longer.
More people are living alone.
In much of the developed world,
the average household size has been
shrinking for decades, which means
you need more units of housing
for the same number of people.
Add to this an increasing number
of people, both domestically and
internationally, migrating into
cities, and you have even more
pressure on the housing supply.
All these factors mean that even
maintaining current affordability
would require building significantly
more homes than we currently do.
So, prices are almost guaranteed to rise.
This isn’t just speculation or financial
engineering, it’s basic arithmetic.
More people competing for the same
number of homes pushes up both rents and
prices, regardless of how sensible or
well-intentioned housing policy might be.
And there is more.
Just when it seemed like low
interest rates might last
forever, everything changed again.
In 2022, inflation came roaring back.
Central banks, which had spent over
a decade keeping rates at historic
lows, suddenly had to do a u-turn.
In a matter of months, interest
rates went from near zero to
levels not seen in over a decade.
In the UK, the base rate
went from 0.1% to 5%.
In the United States,
rates rose even faster.
For anyone with a
mortgage, this was a shock.
If your rate wasn’t fixed,
your monthly payments soared.
People who had borrowed the
maximum amount when rates were
2% suddenly found themselves
paying twice as much each month.
You might have thought this would
have led to a fall in house prices,
as people wouldn’t have been
able to borrow as much as before.
But here's the thing: house
prices didn't collapse.
They did fall slightly in some areas,
and sales slowed down dramatically.
But prices remained stubbornly high.
Why?
Well, because many people who already
owned homes simply stayed put.
If you had a cheap mortgage
locked in, selling rarely made
sense — because wherever you moved
next would almost certainly come
with a much more expensive loan.
This created a kind of gridlock.
Not enough homes for sale, still too
expensive for first-time buyers to
afford, but with even higher monthly
costs due to expensive mortgages.
In other words, the problem
got worse, not better.
So by this point, housing is being
pulled in several directions at once:
cheap money pushing prices up, global
capital treating homes as assets, more
people competing for housing in the same
cities, and a system that struggles to
build enough homes where they’re needed.
And these are often exacerbated, made
worse, by specific local conditions,
so let’s talk about some of those now.
Particularly in Europe, and in almost
any reasonably sized city, an oft-cited
culprit is short-term rentals, and one
name in particular coming to mind: Airbnb.
Landlords were choosing not to rent out
their apartments long-term to locals,
but to tourists on a short-term basis.
The economic rationale for this
is pretty obvious; a landlord can
typically make much more money.
But the effect on the local property
market, as no doubt many of you will
know all too well, is that it has
reduced the supply of available housing
for locals and significantly pushed
up prices, both to buy and to rent.
In Madrid and Barcelona, for example,
over the past decade, rents have risen
by an average of 60% and prices by 90%.
And then there are the countries
which courted wealthy foreigners with
citizenship or tax incentives on the
condition that they invested in property.
In Malta, the tiny Mediterranean island
where I used to live, citizenship was
given to foreigners on the condition
they bought property over a certain
value, thereby reducing the housing
supply for locals and pushing up prices
. On the other side of Europe, Portugal
had a similar scheme which offered
residency to people investing
in the local property market.
In both of these cases, these policies
successfully attracted lots of foreign
money that would otherwise not have
come, but it also helped push up
prices to unprecedented levels.
In Malta, property prices have
doubled in the past decade.
The average asking price in
Malta is €414,000, yet the
average salary is under €25,000.
And it’s a similar situation in Portugal.
In places like this, home ownership
for anyone without family help
is now something of a pipe dream.
And this brings us to one of the
most insidious effects: housing
wealth is becoming hereditary.
Increasingly, the only way young people
can afford to buy is with help from
parents - money for a deposit, co-signing
mortgages, sometimes buying outright.
If your parents own property,
you might still get on the
ladder, as the expression goes.
If they don't, you're locked out,
regardless of how hard you work.
It means your ability to own a home
depends less on your income than on
whether you were lucky enough to have
parents who bought property decades
ago when it was still affordable.
So this is the picture so far.
Global forces push prices up everywhere.
Local factors make the problem
worse in certain places.
And once prices reach a certain level,
you get the situation that exists in many
towns and cities all over the world today.
Whether it’s paying sky-high rent or not
being able to afford a deposit for your
first home, just having your own roof over
your head is more expensive than ever.
So, this brings us to the
trickiest part of the story.
What, if anything can be done about it?
It’s a problem that lots of people
like to see easy solutions to.
Build more homes, control rents, tax
speculation, restrict short-term rentals,
and stop prices from rising so fast.
The reality is that all of these solutions
come with their own share of problems.
Building takes time, and in many
countries–especially in the UK–it
is fraught with regulations.
Removing planning constraints sounds
simple, but in practice it rarely is.
Rent control is one of the
most debated solutions.
The idea is simple: cap how much landlords
can increase rent each year, making
housing more affordable for tenants.
But in practice, it's complicated.
Economists often point to cities like
San Francisco or Stockholm, where strict
rent control led to some landlords taking
properties off the rental market entirely,
either selling them or leaving them empty.
This creates a paradox: by trying to make
rent cheaper for some, it often makes it
harder for others to find a home at all.
That said, some cities have
found some middle ground.
Berlin tried strict rent controls,
had to partially reverse them,
but maintained some protections.
The key seems to be balancing
tenant protection with incentives
to keep landlords in the market.
It's not a silver bullet, but
it's not entirely useless either.
Restricting short-term rentals is
something many cities have now started
to do, with some success, but there are
question marks about how deep an effect
this will have on revenue from tourism.
Taxing speculation is a nice idea
in theory, but it quickly comes up
against another uncomfortable reality:
homeowners, who in many countries
make up a majority of the voting
population, have a vested interest
in prices not coming down, especially
if they took on a large mortgage.
For millions of people, their
home isn’t just somewhere to live.
It’s their main asset.
A large part of their retirement plan.
Their financial safety net.
So when house prices rise, homeowners
feel richer and more secure.
But when prices fall — or even stop
rising — the same group feels threatened.
So, governments face a dilemma.
On the one hand, high house prices
lock younger people out of home
ownership, increase inequality,
and put pressure on rents.
On the other hand, falling house prices
risk angering existing homeowners and
losing voters, destabilising banks,
and triggering wider economic problems.
So instead of dramatic reform, what
we often see are small, cautious
adjustments, adjustments that don’t
always have the intended consequences.
Governments announce ambitious plans
to build more homes, like the new
Labour government did in the UK,
but planning slows down everything,
and they quickly miss their targets.
They launch initiatives to help
first-time buyers with interest-free
loans, but these often end up pushing
prices higher by increasing demand.
They talk about controlling rents, but
make promises to potential investors
that their rights will also be protected.
They make pledges to crack down on
Airbnb, but all that happens is the
implementation of token "tourist taxes".
And then there’s the issue of timing.
Even if a government decides today to
build significantly more housing, the
effects won’t be felt for several years.
Planning, the actual construction,
building in places where
people actually want to live.
That all takes time.
So where does that leave us?
Can house prices keep rising
faster than incomes indefinitely?
The optimistic view is that they can't.
At some point, prices must correct,
either through a crash or through
a long period of stagnation
while wages gradually catch up.
The pessimistic view is that we're not
in a traditional bubble waiting to pop.
This is, as they say, a new equilibrium.
As long as housing is seen as one of
the safest places to park wealth, as
long as there's more capital looking
for safe returns than there are good
investment opportunities, as long
as people continue to move to towns
and cities, and as long as we don't
build enough homes in desirable
locations, prices will keep climbing.
The truth is probably somewhere in
between, and will vary by location.
Some markets may see corrections.
Others may plateau, or
even continue to rise.
Unfortunately, it seems that the
fundamental tension between housing
as a human necessity and housing as
a financial asset is here to stay.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the global property crisis.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
How have property prices
changed in your city?
How has this affected your life, and
what do you think can be done about it?
Let me know in the comments below,
if you're listening to this somewhere
where you can comment, and for the
members among you, you can head right
into our community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
And as a final reminder, if you enjoyed
this episode, and you are wondering
how to more than double the number of
episodes you can get, plus learn with
our interactive transcripts, subtitles,
and key vocabulary, then the place to
go for that is leonardoenglish.com.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.